CHAPTER 1
Open Source Licensing,
Contract, and
Copyright Law
Open source licensing and development approaches have been challenging and
transforming software development for decades. Although open source licensing is
often described as radical, it is built on solid, traditional legal foundations, including
the rights granted by copyright under the law of the United States (and elsewhere),
and the ways in which basic contract principles can alter and supersede those rights.
Basic Principles of Copyright Law
Under the laws of the United States (and of European countries, through the Berne
Convention, and of members of the World Trade Organization through the WTO
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights), copyright is
automatically attached to every novel expression of an idea, whether through text,
sounds, or imagery. For example, the words in this paragraph are protected by copyright
as soon as they are written. This also applies to diary entries, letters, song lyrics,
and drawings, even if they are only done “off the cuff,” in the most casual of
circumstances.
For example, a drawing of a dog made on a café napkin is copyrighted simultaneously
with its creation and is the sole property—barring any contractual abrogation
of the copyright—of its creator. This drawing cannot be copied, displayed, or
otherwise commercially exploited by any person other than the creator for the life of
the copyright. Among other things, no person other than the creator has the right
under copyright law to create “derivative works”—works that depend upon or
develop from the original, copyrighted work. This limitation is of particular significance
to open source licensing, as will be explained later. In the United States, the
period protected by copyright is very long indeed: the life of the creator plus 70
years, or in the case of works made “for hire” or by creators who are not identified,
95 years from the date of publication or 120 years from the date of creation, whichever
is shorter.
This does not mean, of course, that the creator of this drawing has a monopoly on
the depiction of dogs. Copyright law does not protect any particular idea. Rather,
copyright protects only the expression of that idea. The creator of the dog drawing
has a right to the commercial exploitation of only that particular expression of “dog.”
This right is no limitation on the right of others to create, and to commercially
exploit, their own expressions of “dog,” whether through drawing or other media.
This limitation to expressions excludes protection from copyright of creations that
are not expressed in a tangible, reproducible medium. For example, a dramatic
monologue read on a street corner is not protected by copyright. However, if a reading
of that monologue is recorded, whether on audio or videotape or paper, it is subject
to copyright protection.
This limitation to the expressions of an idea is the principal distinction
between the applications of patent and copyright. Unlike copyright,
a valid patent does not protect the expression of an idea but the
underlying substance of it. For example, a patent applicable to a
microchip protects not the expression of the chip itself, or the electrical
diagram describing it, but the idea that given circuits can be organized
and made to operate in a particular way. Because of their
potentially vast scope, patents are construed more strictly, require a
registration process, and last for shorter periods than copyrights.
A copyright does not need to be registered to be legally effective. As already noted, a
copyright comes into force when the protected work is created. While registration of
the work with the United States Copyright Office has some effect on the rights of the
copyright holder, it is not required. Moreover, while works published previous to
March 1, 1989 need to bear explicit notice of copyright protection or risk losing that
protection, works published after that date do not. Nonetheless, use of a copyright
notice alerts potential infringers that the work falls under the protection of copyright.
The vesting of copyright protection in the creator of a work is subject to two important
limitations: the doctrines of “work for hire” and “fair use.” Works that are made
“for hire” are made by an employee in the scope of his or her employment by
another, including those that are specially commissioned for use in another work or
as a supplement to another work, such as a translation. Works that are created “for
hire” are still subject to copyright protection, under the same terms as described
above, but the copyright belongs to the employer of the creator, or the person who
commissioned the work, not the creator.
The doctrine of “fair use” defines certain uses of copyrighted material as non-infringing.
“Fair use” allows persons other than the creator to make certain limited uses of
the copyrighted material for purposes of commenting upon or criticizing the work,
reporting, or teaching related to the copyrighted material. “Fair use” is a flexible
standard, and whether a particular use is considered “fair” depends in substantial
part on the extent to which that use impedes the copyright holder’s exclusive rights
to commercially exploit the work. In addition, one additional category of work is
held to be non-infringing. A “transformative derivative work” is one that, although
based on a copyrighted work, so fundamentally alters it that a new work results.
Such a “transformative derivative work” is considered a new work for copyright purposes,
and the holder of the copyright of the work—from which such a “transformative
derivative work” is derived—has no rights over it.
Finally, the protections of copyright are subject to one more important limitation:
time. Copyrighted works are protected for a set period of time, measured either from
the death of their creator or from the date of their creation. After the expiration of
that period of time, the copyright protection on the work lapses as the work goes
into the “public domain.”
Works currently in the public domain include thousands of songs and musical
works, novels, poems, stories, and histories written before the twentieth century.
Anyone is free to commercially exploit such works by selling copies of those works,
creating derivative works based upon them, and by distribuing or displaying the
work publicly.
Contract and Copyright
In the United States, all of the rights belonging to the creator of a work become theirs
at the time of the completion of that work in a fixed medium. No registration is
required, nor does any signed writing need to be executed in order to preserve those
rights. Rather, these rights arise entirely from the operation of the statutory law.
Creators rarely take advantage of these rights by themselves, however. The production
and distribution of works on a large scale has historically been capital-intensive,
so creators of works have generally relied on others to produce the physical copies of
their works and distribute them. The idea of copyright developed in parallel with the
development of the printing press in the fifteenth century, and it originally protected
the rights of printers to exclusively exploit works that they had commissioned. Legal
enforcement, and, in particular, international legal enforcement, being what it was in
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, copyrights were frequently disregarded. Of
course, given the systematic violation of copyrights in many parts of the world today,
it can be argued that the situation has not changed that much.
The relationship between the creator of a work and its publisher is often an uneasy
one. The creator, naturally, wishes to retain both control over the use of the work
and the income stream derived from commercial exploitation of the work. The publisher,
whether a book company, a record label, or a film studio—to take three common
examples—similarly wishes to retain exactly those same things: control over
and income from the work. Because publishing (in whatever format) is a capitalintensive
business, the dynamic tends to strongly favor the publisher over the creator
of the work, except in the exceptional case of creators who have both a proven
track record of generating income from their work and, perhaps more importantly,
the ability to negotiate without restriction. The case of musicians and their battles
with record labels is particularly well-known.
The most typical trade made between creators and publishers is the licensing of the
work in exchange for payments, known as royalties. In the case of books, authors are
generally entitled to royalties on every copy sold by the publisher. Music royalties are
more complicated because there are more venues in which music can be sold or publicly
performed, but the principle is the same. Royalties are generally owed to the
songwriter for every copy of an album sold (mechanical royalties), for play on jukeboxes
or on the radio (performance royalties), and for use on television or in films
(synchronization royalties).
Software publishing, the subject with which this book is primarily concerned, generally
does not involve the payment of royalties to individuals. Because commercial
software is made, as a general matter, by large teams of people and requires the substantial
expenditure of capital, the resulting work is “work for hire.” As already discussed,
the copyright of such works belongs to the employer, which, in the case of
software, is usually also the publisher and the distributor of the software itself.
In general, under the American copyright system an effective monopoly is vested in
the creator of each work, subject to relatively few limitations. However, for a number
of reasons, most of them having to do with the substantial costs of developing
and distributing work in a mass-market medium, rights held under copyright are
rarely enforced by the work’s creator and very little, if any, of the benefit of the copyright
goes to that person. Rather, because of the negotiation of contracts by publishers
with the creator or through the doctrine of work for hire, the benefits of copyright
flow to the corporations that distribute the work, not the people who create it.